
engl: Plateau

Hochebene: relativ flache, ausgedehnte Region, die (ohne Knicke oder Beulen) gegenüber der Umgebung um mindestens 150 Meter hochgehoben wurde.
-
Eine Hochebene enthält annähern horizontale Gesteinsschichten. Dieselbe Abfolge von Gesteinsschichten findet sich auch um die Hochebene herum,
aber eben höhenmässig versetzt.

{ Das Plateaurätsel #plateauraetsel

 "
  The problem of the uplift of large plateau areas is one which has puzzled students of the
  Earth's crust for a very long time. ~what mechanism~ would cause a large volumen of low standing continents to rise rapidly a mile in the air?
  Furthermore, evidence from gravity surveys suggests that the rocks underlying the Colorado plateau are in isostatic balance, that is,
  this large area is ~floating at its correct elevation~ in view of its mass and density. Recent → Wissenschaft/Geologie/Erdbeben[seismic] evidence confirms this, in that
  the depth to the [→ Wissenschaft/Geologie/Moho[Moho]] discontinuity under the Colorado plateau is approximately 10 kilometers greater
  than over most of continental North America. Thus, appropriate roots of light rock extend into the dense substratum to account for the
  higher elevation of the Colorado plateau. We have then a double-ended mystery, for the Colorado plateau seems to have grown downward at
  the same time that its emerged part rose upward. This is just as startling as it would be to see a floating cork suddenly rise and float a
  half inch higher in a pan of water. To date, the only hypothesis to explain the upward motion of large regions like the Colorado plateau
  is that of convection currents. Slowly moving convection currents in the solid rock, some 40 to 50 kilometers [25 to 30 miles] below the
  surface of the Earth, are presumed to have swept a great volume of light rock from some unidentified place and to have deposited it
  underneath the Colorado plateau. A total volume of approximately 2,500,000 cubic miles of sialic rock is necessary to account for the
  uplift of the Colorado plateau. While it is not hard to visualize rocks as having no great strength at the high pressures and temperatures
  existing at depths of 40 to 50 kilometers, it is quite another matter to visualize currents in solid rock of sufficient magnitude to bring
  in and deposit this quantity of light material in a relatively uniform layer underneath the entire Colorado plateau region.
  -
  The Tibetan plateaus present a similar problem, but on a vastly larger scale. There, an area of 750,000 square miles has been uplifted from approximately sea level to a mean elevation of roughly three miles, and the Himalayan mountain chain bordering this region has floated upward some five miles, and rather late in geologic time, probably within the last 20,000,000 years. The quantity of light rock which would need to be swept underneath these plateaus by convection currents to produce the effects noted would be an order of magnitude greater than that needed to uplift the Colorado plateau, that is, approximately 25,000,000 cubic miles. Even more troublesome than the method of transporting all this light rock at shallow depths below the surface of the Earth is the problem of its source. The region from which the light rock was moved should have experienced spectacular subsidence, but no giant neighboring depressions are known. A lesser but large problem is how such enormous quantities of light rock can be dispersed so uniformly over so large an area.
 " [George C. Kennedy: The Origin of Continents, Mountain Ranges and Ocean Basins, American Scientist, Vol 47, Dez 1959, pp 493-495]

}

sa:
  → Wissenschaft/Geologie/tibetisches-Plateau
